1291838750

This is a great article.

Joe

-----------------

1292434707

Hey - writing about "Door" for the NY Observer and would like to embed the video. Where can I grab that code? 

Ben Popper

-----------------

1292450392

I see where you are headed with this analogy, but where it falls short is the comparison of MySpace to Facebook.  I would almost venture to say that MySpace used to be the Microsoft of social networking, offering too much customization at the cost of an unstable and unattractive system.  In just the way that Microsoft's platform allows the user to customize their hardware to make quite an impressive machine, Facebook's limit on the customization of the user's page delivers an impressive, "pretty," result of blues and clean lines.  I think that Facebook began as, and still is more "Apple" than you are giving them credit for.  I feel the difference is based around what Facebook actually is:  as you stated, a "language" of expression.  Whereas Macs and PCs are machines, the OSs offered on each, Windows and Apple are the platforms to the ways in which we will use each product to express ourselves.  In these ways we begin an investigation of two social spheres we exist in:  our business and personal lives.  Windows has done very well offering a platform for business expression, whereas Apple has made up for the personal aspects of expression.  What Facebook is currently caught in the middle of, and I believe Mark Zuckerberg is having a difficult time navigating, is the negotiation of Facebook's application as both a business and personal expression platform.  It is the pull at either end that is resulting in the changes to privacy, presentation, and functionality throughout Facebook's existence.

Sidenote:  I appreciate the style of your page, but consider the mark of privilege you bring with the antiquated "Mr. Your Name" and not "Ms./Mr. Your Name."

Nicholas S. Mueldener

-----------------

1292533508

You sound bitter.

Charles Eisenberg

-----------------

1294193481

Did you see that? The "mark of privilege"?  What would your mother think?  Mr. Hall!  Gender equality, please!

MS. Snicklebee

-----------------

