Advanced Rhetoric and Discourse, A Final in Five Parts
The order in which I have prioritized these methods as to their relevance to the advertisement in question is very close to the order in which I prioritize them as to their relevance to the study of advertising in general. The only difference is that, due to the ad's clear reliance on a logical argument, I place Argument theory ahead of <a href="">Temptation theory</a>, when I generally consider temptation theory to be the most applicable to the study of advertisement.
This ad is quite explicitly an argument. It presents a formal syllogism, untruncated and unequivocated, in its text: "Your sense of taste returns when you quite smoking. That means you can taste... the nicotine gum you're using to help you quit. Which is why you should quit with Nicorette fresh mint." The major premise is that your sense of taste will return, the minor that nicotine gum has a taste. Ergo, you should chew nicotine gum that tastes good. This is a rare trick for an advertisement, whose taste for truth and logic leave something to be desired. Advertisements must necessarily avoid logic, as their basic premise is completely illogical. Most ads are selling a brand.
Nicorette is only one type of nicotine replacement and only one type of nicotine gum. There is no practical argument to be made for buying one product over another of equivalent function simply because of its name or its manufacturer.
This advertisement avoids logic, as well, and does so by presenting the reader with a logical argument for a product that is not in fact the product that the ad is selling. It explicitly convinces you of the importance of a quality that its product has, but which is not exclusive to its product. It conflates the idea of buying a good-tasting nicotine gum with the idea of buying Nicorette fresh mint gum. The operative phrase for this logically weaker part of the argument is presented with greater visual force. "Nicorette fresh mint is the best tasting nicotine gum." That this is an entirely subjective claim shows where the argument in this ad seeks to mislead.
The logic fails here in two places: One, its claim is not fact. Two, its claim is not necessarily relevant. Even if one were to accept the claim, it would in fact only enter into a set of factors determining the attractiveness of the product.
For instance, if an unflavored or less successfully flavored generic nicotine gum were significantly cheaper, its affordability might still trump Nicorette's superior flavor.
The effectiveness of its formal argument aside, the ad can be parsed through other aspects of argument theory. Among the triad of logos, pathos and ethos, it favors logos and pathos primarily and explicitly, while its primary ethical base is only an implied foundation for its other types of appeals. I describe its logical appeal above. Its pathetic appeal is anything but pathetic. It is two-fold, centered on the emotion of the joy of experience, specifically the sensual experience of taste. Foremost it attaches to the product to a positive taste experience by claiming that its product tastes good, the best, even. Its secondary, implied pathetic appeal stems from and expands its implied ethical appeal. Fundamentally, any smoking cessation product has the tremendous benefit of being on the winning side of the moral war around smoking in the US. This is an implied ethical appeal in all pharmaceutical products, that the problem for which the product is prescribed is bad, that the reader is good beneath their affliction with the problem, and that the product will act as shepherd away from that problem. This ad expands that argument into an appeal to the emotion of enjoyment.
It first reinforces the negativity of the problem of smoking by pointing out that it decreases your sense of taste. Being deprived of ones senses is a highly emotional idea, essential as our senses are to our existence. Think of the great symbolic power of blindness or deafness. While, to quote another ad, "taste loss" is not so serious an affliction as either of those, it regardless taps into the strong connection humans have with their five sense. This works to further demonize smoking. And it does so without taking on a moralistic anti-smoking voice, important, as doing so would alienate the audience. Cessation products must be sold as means of empowerment against the addiction, to avoid the thorny debate around the topic and ingratiate themselves to smokers and anti-smokers, alike.
This argument also parses well through the other argumentative structures that we discussed in class. In terms of <a href="">Toulman arguments</a>, the basic material of the ad is the same, if the vision of its structure is different. Undisputed facts include that the reader wishes to quit smoking, that smoking decreases one's sense of taste, and that the reader believes that nicotine supplements will ease the process of quitting. The ad's desired conclusion is that the reader should buy Nicorette. The warrants that the ad intends to move the reader with are that Nicorette at least tastes good, and that someone thinks it tastes better than all others.
"<a href="">Analgesic Theory</a>" suggests that arguments work by creating or illuminating pain in the audience, and then appearing to assuage that pain. This ad reminds the reader of the pain to losing his sense of taste to his smoking habit, and then offers the duo fold pleasure of a method of ending the cause of that pain while taking advantage of the pain's cessation at the same time.
<a href="">Stasis theory</a> lists four fundamental questions to an argument. To the question of whether cigarette-induced loss of taste exists, it says yes. It claims that the nature of this loss is an inability to enjoy the flavors of things, and that its correction will produce a greater sensation of taste. It claims the quality of this loss to be very unpleasant.  It claims the solution to this loss to be the quitting of smoking with a product that will provide a taste with which to enjoy the solution.
The power of this argument lies in its successfully casting two qualities of its products as, not only beneficial, but interactively so. Nicorette's ability to reduce cravings and its ability to taste good, the ad implies, work in tandem, cyclically improving the effectiveness of the product. As you chew more and smoke less, your taste will return, as your taste returns, you will be more attracted to the gum, and to the cessation of smoking.
This ad tempts us with ease, in two senses. It easily tempts us, and it does so with the concept of reduced effort and pain. The most applicable means of reading temptation theory onto this ad is that of the "third option," or the "merry Christmas and a happy new year" trick. This structure consists of two possibilities, the feasible but unattractive and the attractive but unfeasible. The feasible option here is to quit using an ordinary nicotine gum. This is feasible because it is the option that already exists; the reader will have to make no change in his conception of nicotine gum. It is unattractive because he will be left with a product that does not taste a good as Nicorette fresh mint. The attractive but unfeasible option is to use this product, attractive because it tastes good, but unfeasible because it has not been used before.
The idea that the newness of a product may be an aspect of its feasibility or attractiveness may seem forced, but this is always an implied message in advertisements for newly introduced products. In order to be profitable, companies must constantly introduce new products, so that they can have a constant supply of surging consumer demand. Only newness can inspire a surge in consumer demand, as only newness can justify any single customer switching from one established product to another. The problem with this is that a purchase is an act of trust on the part of the consumer for the needfulness of the product, and that trust is lost if a product changes its identity. Also, it requires companies to introduce "new" products whose new qualities are entirely irrelevant to their functionality. This has the potential to undermine the very purpose of the newness, and the growing media savvy of consumers is a constant threat to this trick. Thus, the newness must be sold forcefully, and is often the only thing that must be sold forcefully, as it will, if successful, sell the product on its own.
That aside, Nicorette manages to be both new and improved, without the use of graphical text explicitly claiming as much. It does this through its textual argument, discussed above. The visual aspect of the ad also works to cast the product as the best of both worlds. The large graphic of a piece of gum implies newness and familiarity. The image is computer generated, clearly an image of newness. Also, the lines shooting from it and overall illustrated look of the graphics suggest just that "New and Improved!" graphic that the ad must avoid in order that its work may happen surreptitiously, bypassing the wary consumers' filters against unsupported claims of useful newness. While the overall angularity--and greenness--of the imagery, impresses us with ideas of newness, mintyness, and its importance as a New Idea, its simplicity counteracts that. The lines are bold but simple, as are the colors, the layout, and the image of the piece of gum. Nicorette is uncomplicated and fundamentally the same. Put it in your mouth and chew, just like before, but now it will taste better. Nothing has changed, says the ad, but everything will be better.
Also fundamental to a successful temptation is the authority of the speaker. The voice of the ad must wield some knowledge of the future, some prophetic ability, in order to establish this authority. This comes in the text of the ad, and is an additional benefit of the ad's providing the reader with the knowledge of smoking's detrimental effects on the sense of taste. The text knows that quitting smoking will bring back your sense of taste. Further, it knows that you, the reader, have quit, and that your sense of taste will therefore return. It can predict this future, a future with a problem, and it can provide a solution to that problem.
The ad tempts its reader by providing a prophecy of the unpleasant experience of chewing non-fresh-mint nicotine gum when his sense of taste has returned. Inside of this prophecy is a dualistic scenario, an unpleasant choice, between bad-tasting gum and an untested product. It solves this problem by justifying its newness, surpassing the need to trust the product through experience by arguing that you can trust it logically.
<a href="">Semiotics</a> illuminates the methods by which unrelated things may be conflated to create new meanings. Through the ambiguity of a concrete linguistic or imagistic signifier, various different signifieds can be referenced, with little regard for their logical relationship, thereby enacting the aforementioned conflation. The various schools of Semiotics provide various vocabularies and hierarchies by which to construct these webs of signs. Piercian, deSauserrian and Jakobsonian models all structure parallel concepts slightly differently, with varying degrees of simplicity or depth. I will deal most expressly with the Piercian, as it is the most complex, structured, and the most inclusive of the others' concepts.
Pierce establishes three agents in the sign process: the representamen and the object are roughly parallel to the deSausseurian concepts of the signifier and signified. Pierce adds the interpretant, though, which is the audience, the agent that interprets the representamen onto the object. Each of these three agents is associated with a set of three types. These types are paralleled across the agents. The representamen references Pierce's three types of signifiers: qualisigns, sinisigns and legisigns. The object references Pierce's three types of signifieds: icons, indexes, and symbols. The interpretant references three more obscure elements, which can be thought of as three experiences of the making of meaning: rhemes, dicents, and arguments. These three sets work in parallel across the agents. Qualisigns parallel icons, which parallel rhemes. Sinisigns parallel indices, which parallel dicents. Legisigns parallel symbols, which parallel arguments.
I take the time to delineate this structure because it speaks to the relevance of semiotics in general. This sort of highly codified, analogous reduction of a text can produce very interesting perspectives on the nature of that text: its assumptions, the nature of its declarations, etc. What does this accomplish, however? It is as though we have taken a typewriter and pulled it apart, meticulously, aligning types of parts into categories and subcategories. While this may be a very interesting process, it is entirely unproductive. We are left with a vision of the typewriter that has the aspect of incredible thought and meaning, but that meaning is built entirely atop the typewriter, and in fact has had no effect upon our vision of its functionality. And in the process, we have only destroyed the typewriter, the text of its construction.
Now let me try to dismantle the advertisement in question. I will do so horizontally, listing representamen, object, and interpretant values for each of the three parallels, in that order. One qualisign in this ad is the idea of a good-tasting nicotine gum. Its taste is the gum's most central qualitative value in the ad. The iconographic equivalent of this is the extensive use of the color green, and the textual claim that it is the "best tasting nicotine gum." The interpretant will experience this as something akin to the rheme ‘pleasurable.' The sinisign is the idea of a medicinal gum, containing a drug supplement for use in the cessation of that drug's use. This is most explicitly indexed in the phrase from the text block, "... nicotine gum...  to help you quit." The interpretant will experience this as something akin to the dicent ‘medicinal.' The legisign is the idea of sensible solution, a sensible gum, sensible in that it notices that it has something to do with your sense of taste coming back, and so becomes better tasting. This is symbolized in the sensible content and conversational tone of the statement in parentheses beneath the major text, "... convenient, since now that you've quit, you can actually taste things again." This is experienced by the interpretant as a logical, common-sense argument.
Semiotics, while an intricate and interesting means of adding some amorphous dimension to an object of study, provides little relevant information about the actual workings of this advertisement. It allows for no personification, no critical judgment of the ad, and so contributes nothing to the goal--my goal, at least--of defining a relationship with the object of study.
Tipping point theory is, I think, rather decidedly inapplicable to the study of advertisement. It has far more relevance to the study of the horizontal transmission of information than to the vertical labored at by ads. Its saving grace is that it is highly applicable to that kind of horizontal transmission. Unlike temptation or argument theories, it is not based upon the process that an agent undertakes to sell a product, or even the process that an agent idea undertakes to formulate its meanings. Rather, it explicitly places the salesman--which is to say, the ad--as an element in its model for the movement of ideas across cultures, through interactive mechanisms.
Some possible applications of tipping point theory to advertisement, which I consider rather forced, include seeing advertising as a potential catalyst for the "tipping" of a product. The nature of "tipping," however, is that it is the product of the alignment of cultural factors around one, seemingly random, and at least unpredictable, trend. Another possible, and misguided, application is to view the characters presented in the "law of the few" as potential tools for advertisements. Celebrities, experts, and "everyday people" might be seen as connectors, mavens, and salesmen, respectively. However, mavens, connectors and salesmen do not perform their specific functions because they are known as such, or can be associated with a company as such, but rather because they physically power the mechanism of trend proliferation through interpersonal interactions. Tipping point theory is the study of word-of-mouth, a very different animal from advertisement.
Were I forced to apply some aspects of tipping point theory to the Nicorette ad, I would probably run to the concept of narrative, rather counter-intuitively located in the "law of context," when it truly belongs in "the law of stickiness." Really, context is an aspect of "stickiness," and "stickiness" is just kind of a stupid name for rhetorical effectiveness. The term "narrative" brings something new, though, so I will briefly tell the story of Nicorette gum.
Nicorette gum one day read an article in Newsweek about how smoking decreases your sense of taste. "That must mean" he thought, "that it returns when you quit smoking." He considered his position, his responsibilities in the world. He realized that he was one thing the people would only be tasting if they were quitting smoking. He then remembered how people always said that he tasted bad. He knew he had to do something. He called up the flavor scientists at GlaxoSmithKline and demanded to be made minty fresh. They acquiesced.
This is a potential heroic narrative for the product. It "evens out" unpleasant aspects, such as its actual interest in increasing profits by driving competing products that may be more effective further afield in the market. It "sharpens details" of the benevolence of the product. It "assimilates [it] to the context" of Rolling Stone magazine, where readers are likely to smoke and to care about the flavor of their nicotine gum. While this method is productive, it is hardly limited to tipping point theory. 
Memetics shares with tipping point theory the problem of being rather inapplicable to the study of advertisement. It also has the problem of being rather inapplicable to everything else. Memetics is so profoundly useless as to, I think, have little applicability to anything beyond an extended and circular thought-experiment. Like tipping point theory it would be better employed in analyzing the patterns of information dissemination horizontally across a culture, not to say that it would be well employed anywhere. Its basic precept of complete non-agency in human creators undermines any kind of analytic process one could undertake with an ad or any other object of study. The ad, magnified through the memetic lens, becomes meaningless, except where the memes can be discussed as agents seeking to replicate. In this anthropomorphizing of memes, two things happen. First, the process of establishing a relationship with an idea, giving it some sort of connotation, is derailed. Memetics is not only profoundly deterministic, but also profoundly nihilistic. Secondly, where you can give some quality to a specific meme, it is only in its effectiveness, its use of its "tricks," in unison with other memes in the memeplex, in order to proliferate itself. Memes basically become little products, and their means of selling themselves bear striking resemblance to those discussed in the other models.
Some memes in this ad: Enjoy the flavors of things. Make quitting smoking easier. Buy Nicorette. The meme "Quit smoking." is curiously absent, but that is a matter of rhetoric or of semiotics. In this instance the "Quit smoking." meme does not exist because it has failed to proliferate because, perhaps, the moralism to which it attached itself became terminally disadvantageous on the pages of Rolling Stone magazine. This is interesting, but is really just context, smoothing out of narratives, conflation of disparate signs, truncating of a syllogisms, or avoidance of the non-merry Christmas or the unhappy New Year.