Among the Dancing Dead

In chapter eighteen, at just before one hour and five minutes into Jean Renoir's The Rules of the Game, a waiter picks up a tray and turns to carry it into the rapt audience. As the camera follows him into the next forty-five seconds of tracking, panning and tilting, it takes us into a masterful microcosm of the infantile chaos of the French bourgeois that is the focus of the film. With two passes, across and back the rear wall of the Chateau's impromptu theatre, we see the beginnings of the two love and lust-driven pursuits that eventually twine together into a denouement of Shakespearean severity.

Behind the responsible waiter with whom we begin the scene, we watch as another servant spills champagne onto his tray of flutes, distracted by the skeleton leaping about doing strange splits on stage and the dancing ghosts moaning through the crowd. Schumacher, sticking out sorely in his usual militaristic garb, stalks behind the waiters' table, pushing aside guests to search for his unfaithful wife and the homeless poacher-turned favorite manservant who has charmed him yet further away from the long-ago-vowed gravitas we can read in Schumacher's rigid scowl.

The fluidity of this scene dictates that its description and analysis be done with a dynamic eye. To freeze a moment in the scene is to prioritize something unrelated to its power, like offering a photograph of a musical number to convey its plot. Regardless, there is a space through which this dance occurs. The layout of the space we will follow is this: The back wall of the room is the plane across which we track, entirely dark when not illuminated by the stage spotlights that dance over the faces of the audience. Cut into it are two archways exposing a well-lit corridor behind. These spaces and the space behind them are where the standing audience crowd and get pushed around by Schumacher. To the left of the archways is the table space from which the waiters operate, between them is a couch where two people might sit, and to their right is a small corner where one man might stand without being much noticed. The camera, as implied, is facing this wall from somewhere around the backs of the rear-most sitting audience members, and moves along a track parallel to this wall, tilting, panning and generally dancing around the topic in parody of its objects' conversations.

The camera tilts down to the couch before the wall whereat sit Christine, the Madame of the Chateau, and Monsieur Saint-Aubin, who is coaxing the drunken hostess into his arms. Here the flying lights become more pronounced. They cast the couch and its inhabitants in randomly alternating pure darkness and pure light, giving their space an ephemeral and precarious quality. What's most interesting here and what fixes the instability of that brief scene, is that the camera continues to dolly sideways, presumably tracking Schumacher. It follows the action of the two lust-doomed only by panning far back behind itself. Therefore we never lose Schumacher's narrative "track," so to speak; we continue to search along with him on the other side of the wall.

Utilizing the obliqueness of angle drawn out with the tracking and reverse panning to further underscore that scene's transitory and unsavory content, the camera then pans quickly, tilting up to land on the next small audience just as the dolly comes to a stop in front of it. The scene now being played straight on at the camera, we recognize it as more wholesome. Alas, here we find Schumacher's long-sought prey uncoiling themselves from a secret embrace just before Schumacher finds them. Content that he has some control now, Schumacher stands appropriately by the side, watching them, so that the camera may continue on. Seemingly with only its momentum, but also carried by Schumacher's gaze as his attention turns to the stage, the camera pans to poor André, holding up the wall and brooding over the petty theft of his love occurring on the couch that we have just seen. The pan amounts to little more than a peek for us, a guilty glance stolen at André's dark corner of angst. The oblique angle this gives connects André to the scene on the couch, and the voyeuristic furtiveness with which we look at him provides a similar darkness.

Our glance at André also acts as a means of reversing the movement of the camera, which Marceau then picks up with his escape, and which Lisette attempts to follow, alerting Schumacher to their conspiracy, so that he must restrain her and, of course shoving aside many guests, begin his armed pursuit of his wily rival. The camera rushes off quickly to follow him, but, that chase continuing behind the wall and thus having concluded it's visual presence within this scene, we instead pick up Christine and Saint-Aubin finally rushing off together.

The camera at first seems to move them to action, its border nudging them off the couch, as though their decision to consummate their teasing sin were spurred by Schumacher's new knowledge of his wife and Marceau having made that same decision. The camera then stops, letting them move away to show their mirthful haste towards more intimate quarters. In this way we follow both narratives as they move into the light of the hallway, though Christine pauses us briefly so that she may offer a maternal glance back at André where he presumably stands sullenly agawk. While the two scamper off, they leave us watching the clumsy waiter, whom we saw at the beginning of the scene pouring champagne, distracted by some number of the debacles playing out in the room, and who is now sopping up all the rich booze that he spilled on his silver tray.

Renoir shows himself to be a masterful artist with the camera as brush. He shows us two narratives of sexual infidelity told with almost no dialogue and only very broad and physical performance. Instead the camera work creates for us the necessary tensions, the charming murderousness of one story with very direct framing, and the rather dubious inanity of the other shot at oblique angles. Renoir crafts a whole morality within these forty-five seconds, with presumably nothing more than a dolly, a grip and a choreographer's eye for fluid detail. Content aside, the movement within this scene is graceful and evocative at the same time. It has that quality of great dance where one movement seems to predict entirely what succeeds it, so that the decisions being made are not seen as such, and we may forget for a moment the contrivance inherent in what we are watching.