Prosodic Analysis of Plath's "Point Shirley"
The most striking accentual cola of the last two stanzas of Plath’s Point Shirley is that of three successive stresses. This cola can be expanded by default to include the two unstressed syllables at either end of the set. More than three stressed syllables would clearly be jarring, and outside of a list, difficult to construct in english, in which a plurality of the meter of even every day speech is iambic. For the purposes of this paper I will leave these unstressed syllables to be assumed.
This pattern mirrors itself in the two stanzas. The first begins with one towards the end of the first line. The second ends with one towards the end of its last line. At the junction between the stanzas, Plath utilizes two of this accentual colon in another almost palindromic pattern. She gives us this driving metrical slap five times in successive lines. In four of the five, the colon comes in the second through the fourth syllables.
In the center-most example, the syllables are at the end of the line. There is a very clear reason for this, one which also explains a variation found in the fourth: The third and fourth lines are one sentence.
This colon is attached to the subjects and objects of the sentences. All five consist of nouns and their modifiers. Being a two-line sentence, this one has room to push the two into its center. There is a quite concrete reason for this that can be derived from the meaning is these lines.
In them, the I enters the poem in what is almost the only places in the stanzas. This implies a weakness of self, or at least a difference of self, a strength in a different place along the line. The more literal connection is that, in order to have an I in the poem, it must be specified early on. It pushes the other nouns into object status. Adding to both the tonal tenuousness of the self implied and the grammatical necessity in these lines is the hypothetical tense added, essentially the future tense. With the I and the 'would', a solid half line is used by connective, less stressed words. Also, in the fourth such line (second in the stanza), the second word of the colon clearly holds only a partial stress by default. That partial stress comes on the word 'your'. What we see from this substitution is that the introduction of the I and of the hypothetical tense (and the two may be inextricable here) both "weakens" the meter by necessity of its grammar and communicates the weakness of this I and this 'you', of these people in the face of the powerful water.
The lines more firmly in the pattern all are offering images of nature, and nature in this poem is frighteningly strong, as strong as the sudden appearance of three stressed syllables to an ear so used to erroneous words amid language.
Meaning aside, these cola connecting the stanzas shows a remarkable attention to the need to walk the reader over that break in music and meaning. Plath takes us from brutal images of nature "dog-faced" and "bloody red" into images of supple maternity, not a small leap. So happily, the five lines are as regular as any in the poem. Not only do they offer what I have just discussed, but all but two syllables in the rest of the lines alternate stress and nonstress, and the two unstressed are parts of the connecting language of the varied sentence.
The broadest assertion I have to make, and it is almost too broad for comfort, is that Plath links her images of the natural to heavy stress, and her images of the human, the constructed, the emotional to alternating stress. This fits perfectly with the poem’s assertion of the force and forcefulness of nature, its monotonous wearing at itself, its constant beating at the shore. The wavering meter of the human images is akin to the fickle patterns of human emotion. I must admit that this seems tenuous to me, that I do not believe it likely that this entered Plath’s mind so articulated as it does mine. However, it is my equivalent to religious faith that the magic of writing (all art, really) is that, in the ordering of one's own sense, these patterns arise not from our conscious work to create them (nothing conscious could match on so many distinct points) but become apparent in a critical mass of our imposition of the fundamental order of our thoughts onto all that we make.